Getting Started
===============

Northstar supports the creation of many user mods. This guide will teach you the basics
of modding to get you started.

Check out the :doc:`usage` section for further information, including
:ref:`installation`.

Basics
------

This guide assumes you have basic understanding with programming and know how to use
developer environments. Listed below are tools useful for exporting file formats.

If you'd like a more lengthy set of tutorials covering many topics. Look at: `NoSkill
modding guide <https://noskill.gitbook.io/titanfall2/>`_

Tools
-----

To get started with modding for Northstar, we recommend getting yourself some tools.
Check out the :doc:`tools` section for more information.

Quick Start
-----------

In order to get started with making your mod, create a folder in ``R2Northstar/mods``.
While it isn't required, it is best practise by mod authors to follow the naming scheme
``Author.ModName``, such as ``Northstar.Client``.

After making this folder, inside it add a folder named ``mod`` and a file named
``mod.json``.

Provided is a template ``mod.json``, for a detailed list of values read the
:doc:`cheatsheet`

.. code-block:: json

    {
       "Name": "Yourname.Modname",
       "Description": "Woo yeah wooo!",

       "LoadPriority": 0,
       "ConVars": [],
       "Scripts": [],
       "Localisation": []
    }

Inside the ``mod`` folder, existing files found in the engine's virtual file system will
be overwritten and new files can be added. If you need to define new Squirrel files
``(.nut/.gnut)`` they *must* be declared in the ``"Scripts"`` array in `mod.json`. An
example for this might be:

.. code-block:: json

    "Scripts": [
       {
          "Path": "path/to/file.nut",
          "RunOn": "( CLIENT || SERVER ) && MP"
       },
       {
          "Path": "path/to/another_file.nut",
          "RunOn": "( CLIENT || SERVER ) && MP",
          "ClientCallback": {
             "Before": "ClientPreMapspawnThing",
             "After": "AfterMapspawnClientThing"
          },
          "ServerCallback": {
             "Before": "ServerPreMapspawncrap",
             "After": "ServerAfterMapspawnWoo"
          }
       }
    ]

``"Path"`` indicates where the script is, ``"RunOn"`` is the Squirrel VM context (see
:doc:`../native/sqvm`) as an expression, and ``"ClientCallback"`` and
``"ServerCallback"`` specify a function call that can be ``"Before"`` and/or ``"After"``
map-spawn.

Detailed ``mod.json`` architecture
----------------------------------

Located at your mod's root folder, the ``mod.json`` file is the entrypoint of your mod;
it contains human-readable information about it, which scripts to load, and a bunch of
interesting stuff.

This guide will dig into each of the possible ``mod.json`` fields. Please note that
``mod.json`` keys must start with an uppercase letter.

This is what a well-formatted ``mod.json`` looks like:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "Name": "Northstar.CustomServers",
        "Description": "Attempts to recreate the behaviour of vanilla Titanfall 2 servers, as well as changing some scripts to allow better support for mods",
        "Version": "1.5.0",
        "LoadPriority": 0,
        "ConVars": [
            {
                "Name": "ns_private_match_last_mode",
                "DefaultValue": "tdm"
            },
            {
                "Name": "ns_private_match_last_map",
                "DefaultValue": "mp_forwardbase_kodai"
            }
        ],
        "Scripts": [
            {
                "Path": "sh_northstar_utils.gnut",
                "RunOn": "CLIENT || SERVER || UI"
            },
            {
                "Path": "mp/_classic_mp_dropship_intro.gnut",
                "RunOn": "SERVER && MP"
            }
        ],
        "Localisation": [
            "resource/northstar_custom_%language%.txt"
        ]
    }

.. note::

    The real ``Northstar.CustomServers`` mod contains more convars and scripts, some
    have been removed for the readability of the example.

Name and description
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Those ones are pretty self-explanatory. Both fields are used by Northstar itself to
display in-game information about your mod in the main screen ``Mods`` menu.

Best pratice for your mod's name is to use the ``Author.ModName`` convention.

Version
~~~~~~~

This field specifies version of your mod using ``X.Y.Z`` scheme; this field must be
updated each time you release a new version of your mod.

Common use is to increase *Z* when you publish a fix (*e.g.* ``1.5.0`` to ``1.5.1``),
and increase *Y* when you release new features (*e.g.* ``1.5.1`` to ``1.6.0``).

Best practise is to follow semantic versioning (https://semver.org/).

LoadPriority
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This field defines the order in which all mods will be loaded by Northstar. For example,
a mod with ``"LoadPriority": 1`` will be loaded after a mod with ``"LoadPriority": 0``.

If your mod uses code from another mod, make sure to set a greater LoadPriority than the
mod you're using code from.

ConVars
~~~~~~~

This field lists configuration variables, that can be set by servers owners to modify
behaviour of your mod.

Each configuration variable must have a ``"Name"`` and a ``"DefaultValue"``. ConVars can
also have an optional ``"Flags"`` field which specifies special behaviour and an
optional ``"HelpString"`` field which specifies the usage of the ConVar which can be
view in-game by running ``help <convar>``.

You can access configuration variables from squirrel code using ``GetConVarInt``,
``GetConVarFloat``, ``GetConVarBool`` or ``GetConVarString`` calls.

.. warning::

    No matter the type of your variables, they have to be JSON strings, otherwise game
    won't start!

Example
+++++++

If I don't want to wait 15 seconds for matches to start on my server,
``Northstar.CustomServers`` mod exposes a ConVar named
``ns_private_match_countdown_length`` in its ``mod.json`` manifesto:

.. code-block:: json

    "ConVars": [
        {
            "Name": "ns_private_match_countdown_length",
            "DefaultValue": "15"
        },

        ...
    ]

I can setup the ``ns_private_match_countdown_length`` variable in my
``R2Northstar/mods/Northstar.CustomServers/mod/cfg/autoexec_ns_server.cfg``
configuration file.

When starting a match, ``Northstar.CustomServers`` mod will retrieve the configuration
variable value, or its default value if it hasn't been specified in configuration file:

.. code-block::

    // start countdown
    SetUIVar( level, "gameStartTime", Time() + GetConVarFloat( "ns_private_match_countdown_length" ) )

.. note::

    All ``Northstar.CustomServers`` ConVars are listed here:
    https://r2northstar.gitbook.io/r2northstar-wiki/hosting-a-server-with-northstar/basic-listen-server

Flags
+++++

You can assign flags to configuration variables; to use several flags at once, just add
their values.

.. list-table:: Configuration variable flags
    :widths: 20 15 55
    :header-rows: 1

    - - Name
      - Value
      - Description
    - - FCVAR_UNREGISTERED
      - 1
      - If this is set, don't add to linked list, etc.
    - - FCVAR_DEVELOPMENTONLY
      - 2
      - Hidden in released products. Flag is removed automatically if
        ALLOW_DEVELOPMENT_CVARS is defined.
    - - FCVAR_GAMEDLL
      - 4
      - Defined by the game DLL
    - - FCVAR_CLIENTDLL
      - 8
      - Defined by the client DLL
    - - FCVAR_HIDDEN
      - 16
      - Hidden. Doesn't appear in find or auto complete. Not deterred by
        ALLOW_DEVELOPMENT_CVARS.
    - - FCVAR_PROTECTED
      - 32
      - It's a server cvar, but we don't send the data since it's a password, etc. Sends
        1 if it's not bland/zero, 0 otherwise as value.
    - - FCVAR_SPONLY
      - 64
      - This cvar cannot be changed by clients connected to a multiplayer server.
    - - FCVAR_ARCHIVE
      - 128
      - Save this ConVar's value to vars.rc - this works both server and client-side.
    - - FCVAR_NOTIFY
      - 256
      - Notifies players when this ConVar's value was changed.
    - - FCVAR_USERINFO
      - 512
      - Changes the client's info string
    - - FCVAR_PRINTABLEONLY
      - 1024
      - This cvar's string cannot contain unprintable characters ( e.g., used for player
        name etc ).
    - - FCVAR_UNLOGGED
      - 2048
      - If this is a FCVAR_SERVER, don't log changes to the log file / console if we are
        creating a log
    - - FCVAR_NEVER_AS_STRING
      - 4096
      - never try to print that cvar
    - - FCVAR_REPLICATED (AKA FCVAR_SERVER)
      - 8192
      - This value is set by server and replicated by clients.
    - - FCVAR_CHEAT
      - 16384
      - Do NOT allow changing of this convar by console, unless sv_cheats is 1.
    - - FCVAR_SS
      - 32768
      - causes varnameN where N == 2 through max splitscreen slots for mod to be
        autogenerated
    - - FCVAR_DEMO
      - 65536
      - Record this cvar in a demo.
    - - FCVAR_DONTRECORD
      - 131072
      - Don't record this.
    - - FCVAR_SS_ADDED
      - 262144
      - This is one of the "added" FCVAR_SS variables for the splitscreen players
    - - FCVAR_RELEASE
      - 524288
      - This value is available to the end user.
    - - FCVAR_RELOAD_MATERIALS
      - 1048576
      - If this cvar changes, it forces a material reload
    - - FCVAR_RELOAD_TEXTURES
      - 2097152
      - If this cvar changes, it forces a texture reload
    - - FCVAR_NOT_CONNECTED
      - 4194304
      - cvar cannot be changed by a client that is connected to a server
    - - FCVAR_MATERIAL_SYSTEM_THREAD
      - 8388608
      - Indicates this cvar is read from the material system thread
    - - FCVAR_ARCHIVE_PLAYERPROFILE
      - 16777216
      - Save this, but to profile.cfg instead - meaning this only works for clients.
    - - FCVAR_ACCESSIBLE_FROM_THREADS
      - 33554432
      - used as a debugging tool necessary to check material system thread convars
    - - FCVAR_SERVER_CAN_EXECUTE
      - 268435456
      - the server is allowed to execute this command on clients via
        ClientCommand/NET_StringCmd/CBaseClientState::ProcessStringCmd
    - - FCVAR_SERVER_CANNOT_QUERY
      - 536870912
      - If this is set, then the server is not allowed to query this cvar's value (via
        IServerPluginHelpers::StartQueryCvarValue).
    - - FCVAR_CLIENTCMD_CAN_EXECUTE
      - 1073741824
      - IVEngineClient::ClientCmd is allowed to execute this command. Note:
        IVEngineClient::ClientCmd_Unrestricted can run any client command.

.. note::

    Some flags have been skipped due to them being generally useless unless you have
    very specific requirements.

Scripts
~~~~~~~

The scripts field lets you declare an array of Squirrel files to import into your mod.

Each script entry must have a "Path" value and a "RunOn" value.

.. code-block:: json

     "Scripts": [
         {
             "Path": "path/to/file.nut",
             "RunOn": "( CLIENT || SERVER ) && MP"
         },
         {
             "Path": "path/to/another_file.nut",
             "RunOn": "( CLIENT || SERVER ) && MP",
             "ClientCallback": {
                 "Before": "ClientPreMapspawnThing",
                 "After": "AfterMapspawnClientThing"
             },
             "ServerCallback": {
                 "Before": "ServerPreMapspawncrap",
                 "After": "ServerAfterMapspawnWoo"
             }
         }
    ]

Path
++++

Path of the Squirrel file to import, without ``mod/scripts/vscripts`` prefix (that's
where your script files should go).

RunOn
+++++

A boolean expression which tells the game when and in which context to compile the script.


.. list-table:: Avalible flags
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - SERVER
     - Server script VM, recompiles on map change
   * - CLIENT
     - Client script VM, recompiles on map change
   * - UI
     - UI script VM, recompiles on when `uiscript_reset` is ran
   * - SP
     - Singleplayer
   * - MP
     - Multiplayer
   * - DEV
     - Value of developer convar
   * - LOBBY
     - True in mp_lobby. (Server and client VMs only)
   * - MAP_mp_box
     - True if the given map name is being loaded
   * - GAMEMODE_at
     - True if the given game mode is being loaded

``CLIENT && !LOBBY`` - Compiles on client and not in the lobby. So during actual singeplayer and multiplayer gameplay.

``CLIENT && MP && !LOBBY`` - Compiles on client, only in multiplayer and not in the lobby.

``( CLIENT || SERVER ) && MP`` - Compiles on both client and server only in multiplayer.

``CLIENT && SP && MAP_sp_boomtown`` - Compiles only on client in singleplayer only when the map ``sp_boomtown`` is loaded. ( Here ``SP`` isn't needed as ``sp_boomtown`` is singleplayer only )

``CLIENT && GAMEMODE_aitdm`` - Compiles on client on both singleplayer and multiplayer only when the ``aitdm`` gamemode is set. ( ``aitdm`` is attrition which is multiplayer only so this script only compiles on multiplayer )


ClientCallback / ServerCallback
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Specify methods that will be called before/after map spawn.

Localisation
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This field is an array listing localisation files relative paths.

For more info about localisation works on Northstar, read the :doc:`localisation`
section.

.. note::

    This project is under active development.
